docs/architecture.md, before:

# tzbucket Architecture Design

## Overview

`tzbucket` is a Rust CLI tool that deterministically assigns timestamps to calendar-based buckets (day/week/month) in an IANA timezone, with explicit DST handling. The tool consists of two crates: `tzbucket-core` (library) and `tzbucket-cli` (binary).

---

## High-Level Component Diagram

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                              tzbucket-cli                                    │
│  ┌─────────────┐    ┌──────────────┐    ┌────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │   CLI Args  │───▶│  Subcommand  │───▶│         Output Formatter       │  │
│  │   (clap)    │    │   Handler    │    │    (JSON/Text, deterministic)  │  │
│  └─────────────┘    └──────┬───────┘    └────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                            │                                                │
└────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                             │
                             ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                              tzbucket-core                                   │
│  ┌─────────────┐    ┌──────────────┐    ┌────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │   Models    │───▶│   Bucket     │───▶│      Timezone Engine           │  │
│  │             │    │   Compute    │    │    (chrono + chrono-tz)        │  │
│  │ - Interval  │    │              │    │                                │  │
│  │ - WeekStart │    │              │    │ - UTC ↔ Local conversion       │  │
│  │ - Policy    │    │              │    │ - DST boundary detection       │  │
│  │ - Bucket    │    │              │    │ - Ambiguous/Nonexistent handle │  │
│  └─────────────┘    └──────────────┘    └────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                                                                              │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│  │                         Error Types                                  │    │
│  │  - ParseError (exit 2)                                               │    │
│  │  - PolicyError (exit 2)                                              │    │
│  │  - RuntimeError (exit 3)                                             │    │
│  └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Module Structure

### tzbucket-core Crate

```
crates/tzbucket-core/src/
├── lib.rs              # Public API exports
├── models/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── interval.rs     # Interval enum (Day/Week/Month)
│   ├── week_start.rs   # WeekStart enum (Monday/Sunday)
│   ├── policy.rs       # Policy struct for DST handling
│   └── bucket.rs       # Bucket struct with start/end times
├── compute/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── bucket.rs       # Bucket computation algorithm
│   └── range.rs        # Range bucket generation
├── timezone/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── conversion.rs   # UTC ↔ Local conversion utilities
│   └── dst.rs          # DST detection and handling
├── parse/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   └── timestamp.rs    # Timestamp parsing (epoch_ms, epoch_s, rfc3339)
└── error.rs            # Error types and Result alias
```

### tzbucket-cli Crate

```
crates/tzbucket-cli/src/
├── main.rs             # Entry point, CLI setup
├── cli/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── args.rs         # clap struct definitions
│   ├── bucket.rs       # bucket subcommand handler
│   ├── range.rs        # range subcommand handler
│   └── explain.rs      # explain subcommand handler
├── output/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── json.rs         # JSON output formatting
│   └── text.rs         # Text output formatting
└── exit_code.rs        # Exit code constants
```

---

## Key Types and Responsibilities

### Core Models

| Type | Responsibility |
|------|----------------|
| `Interval` | Enum representing bucket granularity: `Day`, `Week`, `Month` |
| `WeekStart` | Enum for week boundary: `Monday`, `Sunday` |
| `Policy` | Configuration for DST edge cases: `nonexistent` and `ambiguous` handling |
| `Bucket` | Represents a calendar bucket with `key`, `start_local`, `end_local`, `start_utc`, `end_utc` |
| `Timestamp` | Parsed input timestamp with both RFC3339 representation and epoch_ms |
| `BucketResult` | Complete output for a single bucket operation including input, tz, interval, and bucket |

### Policy Configuration

```
Policy
├── nonexistent: NonexistentPolicy
│   ├── Error      # Return error for nonexistent local times
│   └── ShiftForward  # Map to next valid time
└── ambiguous: AmbiguousPolicy
    ├── Error      # Return error for ambiguous local times
    ├── First      # Use first occurrence (earlier offset)
    └── Second     # Use second occurrence (later offset)
```

### Error Types

| Error Type | Exit Code | When Used |
|------------|-----------|-----------|
| `ParseError` | 2 | Invalid timestamp format, unknown timezone |
| `PolicyError` | 2 | DST policy violation (nonexistent/ambiguous with error policy) |
| `RuntimeError` | 3 | I/O errors, unexpected failures |

---

## Data Flow by Subcommand

### bucket Subcommand

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│   Input      │────▶│   Parse      │────▶│   Convert    │────▶│   Compute    │
│   Source     │     │   Timestamp  │     │   to Local   │     │   Bucket     │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘
      │                    │                    │                    │
      ▼                    ▼                    ▼                    ▼
  stdin/file          epoch_ms/s         chrono-tz            Find bucket
  (streaming)         rfc3339            IANA TZ              boundaries
                                                                in local time
                                                                convert back
                                                                    │
                                                                    ▼
                                                            ┌──────────────┐
                                                            │   Output     │
                                                            │   JSON/Text  │
                                                            └──────────────┘
```

**Steps:**
1. Read timestamps from stdin or file (streaming, line by line)
2. Parse each timestamp according to input format (epoch_ms, epoch_s, rfc3339)
3. Convert UTC instant to local datetime in specified timezone
4. Compute bucket boundaries:
   - Day: local 00:00:00 to next day 00:00:00
   - Week: week-start local 00:00:00 to next week-start 00:00:00
   - Month: first day of month 00:00:00 to first day of next month 00:00:00
5. Convert bucket boundaries back to UTC
6. Output result in specified format

### range Subcommand

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│   Start/End  │────▶│   Parse      │────▶│   Generate   │────▶│   Sort &     │
│   Timestamps │     │   Range      │     │   Buckets    │     │   Output     │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘
```

**Steps:**
1. Parse start and end timestamps (UTC instants)
2. Convert to local time in specified timezone
3. Generate all buckets between start and end:
   - Find first bucket boundary on or after start
   - Iterate bucket boundaries until past end
4. Sort buckets by `start_utc` (deterministic output)
5. Output as JSON array

### explain Subcommand

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│   Local      │────▶│   Analyze    │────▶│   Apply      │────▶│   Output     │
│   Time + TZ  │     │   DST Status │     │   Policy     │     │   Result     │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘
```

**Steps:**
1. Parse local time string (no offset) and timezone
2. Analyze DST status:
   - Normal: unique mapping to UTC
   - Nonexistent: time skipped during DST spring forward
   - Ambiguous: time occurs twice during DST fall back
3. Apply policy to resolve:
   - Error policies: return error with explanation
   - Resolution policies: compute the resolved UTC instant
4. Output explanation with DST details

---

## DST Handling Strategy

### Problem Statement

Daylight Saving Time creates two categories of problematic local times:

1. **Nonexistent Times**: During spring forward, a range of local times is skipped
   - Example: In Europe/Berlin on 2026-03-29, 02:00 jumps to 03:00
   - Local times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 do not exist

2. **Ambiguous Times**: During fall back, a range of local times occurs twice
   - Example: In Europe/Berlin on 2026-10-25, 02:00 occurs twice
   - Local times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 are ambiguous

### Strategy for bucket Subcommand

The `bucket` command only accepts **Instants** (UTC timestamps with offset), so:
- No ambiguous/nonexistent times can be input
- DST is handled during bucket boundary computation
- Bucket boundaries are computed in local time, then converted to UTC

**Example: DST Start Day Bucket**

```
Input: 2026-03-29T00:15:00Z (UTC)
TZ: Europe/Berlin

1. Convert to local: 2026-03-29T01:15:00+01:00 (before DST switch)
2. Find day bucket start: 2026-03-29T00:00:00 local
3. Find day bucket end: 2026-03-30T00:00:00 local
4. Convert boundaries to UTC:
   - start_local 2026-03-29T00:00:00+01:00 → 2026-03-28T23:00:00Z
   - end_local 2026-03-30T00:00:00+02:00 → 2026-03-29T22:00:00Z
5. Result: 23-hour bucket (DST spring forward)
```

### Strategy for explain Subcommand

The `explain` command accepts local times without offset, requiring explicit policy:

```
Nonexistent Time Resolution:
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Input: 2026-03-29T02:30:00 in Europe/Berlin                 │
│ Status: Nonexistent (skipped during DST spring forward)     │
│                                                             │
│ Policy: Error → Return error with explanation               │
│ Policy: ShiftForward → Resolve to 2026-03-29T03:00:00+02:00 │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

Ambiguous Time Resolution:
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Input: 2026-10-25T02:30:00 in Europe/Berlin                 │
│ Status: Ambiguous (occurs twice during DST fall back)       │
│                                                             │
│ Policy: Error → Return error with explanation               │
│ Policy: First → Resolve to 2026-10-25T02:30:00+02:00 (DST)  │
│ Policy: Second → Resolve to 2026-10-25T02:30:00+01:00 (STD) │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Bucket Boundary Computation Across DST

When computing bucket boundaries that span DST transitions:

1. **Compute in local time first**: Find the local calendar boundary
2. **Convert each boundary independently**: Each conversion handles its own DST context
3. **Result may have non-24-hour buckets**: This is correct and expected

```
DST Spring Forward (23-hour day):
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Local: 2026-03-29 00:00 → 2026-03-30 00:00                   │
│ UTC:   2026-03-28 23:00Z → 2026-03-29 22:00Z (23 hours)      │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

DST Fall Back (25-hour day):
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Local: 2026-10-25 00:00 → 2026-10-26 00:00                   │
│ UTC:   2026-10-24 22:00Z → 2026-10-25 23:00Z (25 hours)      │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## JSON Output Contract

All output uses structs with serde serialization for deterministic field ordering:

### bucket Output

```json
{
  "input": {
    "ts": "2026-03-29T00:15:00Z",
    "epoch_ms": 1793362500000
  },
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "interval": "day",
  "bucket": {
    "key": "2026-03-29",
    "start_local": "2026-03-29T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-30T00:00:00+02:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-28T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-29T22:00:00Z"
  }
}
```

### range Output

```json
[
  {
    "key": "2026-03-27",
    "start_local": "2026-03-27T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-28T00:00:00+01:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-26T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-27T23:00:00Z"
  },
  {
    "key": "2026-03-28",
    "start_local": "2026-03-28T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-29T00:00:00+02:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-27T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-28T22:00:00Z"
  }
]
```

### explain Output

```json
{
  "input_local": "2026-03-29T02:30:00",
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "status": "nonexistent",
  "resolution": {
    "policy": "shift_forward",
    "resolved_utc": "2026-03-29T01:00:00Z",
    "resolved_local": "2026-03-29T03:00:00+02:00"
  }
}
```

---

## Dependencies

### tzbucket-core

| Crate | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `chrono` | Date/time primitives |
| `chrono-tz` | IANA timezone database (compile-time) |
| `serde` | Serialization for JSON output |
| `thiserror` | Error type definitions |

### tzbucket-cli

| Crate | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `tzbucket-core` | Core library |
| `clap` | CLI argument parsing |
| `serde_json` | JSON output |
| `tracing` | Logging/debugging |
| `tracing-subscriber` | Log output configuration |
| `anyhow` | Error handling in main |

---

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests (tzbucket-core)

- Interval/WeekStart/Policy model tests
- Timestamp parsing tests
- Bucket computation tests with known DST boundaries
- Timezone conversion tests

### Integration Tests (tzbucket-cli)

- Golden tests using fixtures and expected JSON output
- Exit code verification
- Streaming input tests

### Required Fixtures

1. `berlin_dst_start_2026.txt` - Timestamps around 2026-03-29 DST spring forward
2. `berlin_dst_end_2026.txt` - Timestamps around 2026-10-25 DST fall back
3. `ny_dst_2026.txt` - Smoke test for America/New_York timezone
4. `explain_nonexistent.txt` - Local time that does not exist
5. `explain_ambiguous.txt` - Local time that is ambiguous

---

## Implementation Order

1. **Core models**: `Interval`, `WeekStart`, `Policy`, `Bucket` structs
2. **Timestamp parsing**: epoch_ms, epoch_s, rfc3339 formats
3. **Bucket computation**: Day bucket first, then Week, then Month
4. **CLI bucket subcommand**: Basic functionality
5. **DST tests**: Berlin fixtures and golden files
6. **range subcommand**: Bucket list generation
7. **explain subcommand**: DST analysis and policy resolution
8. **Error handling**: Proper exit codes and messages

Commit message:

refactor(core): change week bucket key to use starting date
Replace ISO week number format (YYYY-Wnn) with week starting date
(YYYY-MM-DD) for week bucket keys. This simplifies the implementation
by removing complex week number calculation logic and provides a more
intuitive key format that works consistently for both Monday and Sunday
week starts.

The new format makes sorting straightforward (lexicographic order equals
chronological order) and allows easy determination of the exact date
range from the key.

Also includes documentation updates for bucket key formats, range
semantics, and DST handling behavior.

BREAKING CHANGE: Week bucket keys now use YYYY-MM-DD format instead of
YYYY-Wnn format. Any code parsing or filtering by week bucket keys will
need to be updated.

docs/architecture.md, after:

# tzbucket Architecture Design

## Overview

`tzbucket` is a Rust CLI tool that deterministically assigns timestamps to calendar-based buckets (day/week/month) in an IANA timezone, with explicit DST handling. The tool consists of two crates: `tzbucket-core` (library) and `tzbucket-cli` (binary).

---

## High-Level Component Diagram

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                              tzbucket-cli                                    │
│  ┌─────────────┐    ┌──────────────┐    ┌────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │   CLI Args  │───▶│  Subcommand  │───▶│         Output Formatter       │  │
│  │   (clap)    │    │   Handler    │    │    (JSON/Text, deterministic)  │  │
│  └─────────────┘    └──────┬───────┘    └────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                            │                                                │
└────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                             │
                             ▼
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                              tzbucket-core                                   │
│  ┌─────────────┐    ┌──────────────┐    ┌────────────────────────────────┐  │
│  │   Models    │───▶│   Bucket     │───▶│      Timezone Engine           │  │
│  │             │    │   Compute    │    │    (chrono + chrono-tz)        │  │
│  │ - Interval  │    │              │    │                                │  │
│  │ - WeekStart │    │              │    │ - UTC ↔ Local conversion       │  │
│  │ - Policy    │    │              │    │ - DST boundary detection       │  │
│  │ - Bucket    │    │              │    │ - Ambiguous/Nonexistent handle │  │
│  └─────────────┘    └──────────────┘    └────────────────────────────────┘  │
│                                                                              │
│  ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐    │
│  │                         Error Types                                  │    │
│  │  - ParseError (exit 2)                                               │    │
│  │  - PolicyError (exit 2)                                              │    │
│  │  - RuntimeError (exit 3)                                             │    │
│  └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## Module Structure

### tzbucket-core Crate

```
crates/tzbucket-core/src/
├── lib.rs              # Public API exports
├── models/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── interval.rs     # Interval enum (Day/Week/Month)
│   ├── week_start.rs   # WeekStart enum (Monday/Sunday)
│   ├── policy.rs       # Policy struct for DST handling
│   └── bucket.rs       # Bucket struct with start/end times
├── compute/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── bucket.rs       # Bucket computation algorithm
│   └── range.rs        # Range bucket generation
├── timezone/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── conversion.rs   # UTC ↔ Local conversion utilities
│   └── dst.rs          # DST detection and handling
├── parse/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   └── timestamp.rs    # Timestamp parsing (epoch_ms, epoch_s, rfc3339)
└── error.rs            # Error types and Result alias
```

### tzbucket-cli Crate

```
crates/tzbucket-cli/src/
├── main.rs             # Entry point, CLI setup
├── cli/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── args.rs         # clap struct definitions
│   ├── bucket.rs       # bucket subcommand handler
│   ├── range.rs        # range subcommand handler
│   └── explain.rs      # explain subcommand handler
├── output/
│   ├── mod.rs          # Module exports
│   ├── json.rs         # JSON output formatting
│   └── text.rs         # Text output formatting
└── exit_code.rs        # Exit code constants
```

---

## Key Types and Responsibilities

### Core Models

| Type | Responsibility |
|------|----------------|
| `Interval` | Enum representing bucket granularity: `Day`, `Week`, `Month` |
| `WeekStart` | Enum for week boundary: `Monday`, `Sunday` |
| `Policy` | Configuration for DST edge cases: `nonexistent` and `ambiguous` handling |
| `Bucket` | Represents a calendar bucket with `key`, `start_local`, `end_local`, `start_utc`, `end_utc` |
| `Timestamp` | Parsed input timestamp with both RFC3339 representation and epoch_ms |
| `BucketResult` | Complete output for a single bucket operation including input, tz, interval, and bucket |

### Bucket Key Formats

Each bucket is identified by a unique key string:

| Interval | Key Format | Example | Description |
|----------|------------|---------|-------------|
| `Day` | `YYYY-MM-DD` | `2026-03-29` | Calendar date in local timezone |
| `Week` | `YYYY-MM-DD` | `2026-03-23` | Week starting date (Monday or Sunday per `WeekStart`) |
| `Month` | `YYYY-MM` | `2026-03` | Year and month in local timezone |

**Design Decision:** Week keys use the week starting date rather than ISO week numbers (e.g., `2026-W13`). This approach:
- Makes sorting straightforward (lexicographic order = chronological order)
- Allows easy determination of the exact date range from the key
- Supports both Monday and Sunday week starts unambiguously

### Policy Configuration

```
Policy
├── nonexistent: NonexistentPolicy
│   ├── Error      # Return error for nonexistent local times
│   └── ShiftForward  # Map to next valid time
└── ambiguous: AmbiguousPolicy
    ├── Error      # Return error for ambiguous local times
    ├── First      # Use first occurrence (earlier offset)
    └── Second     # Use second occurrence (later offset)
```

### Error Types

| Error Type | Exit Code | When Used |
|------------|-----------|-----------|
| `ParseError` | 2 | Invalid timestamp format, unknown timezone |
| `PolicyError` | 2 | DST policy violation (nonexistent/ambiguous with error policy) |
| `RuntimeError` | 3 | I/O errors, unexpected failures |

---

## Data Flow by Subcommand

### bucket Subcommand

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│   Input      │────▶│   Parse      │────▶│   Convert    │────▶│   Compute    │
│   Source     │     │   Timestamp  │     │   to Local   │     │   Bucket     │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘
      │                    │                    │                    │
      ▼                    ▼                    ▼                    ▼
  stdin/file          epoch_ms/s         chrono-tz            Find bucket
  (streaming)         rfc3339            IANA TZ              boundaries
                                                                in local time
                                                                convert back
                                                                    │
                                                                    ▼
                                                            ┌──────────────┐
                                                            │   Output     │
                                                            │   JSON/Text  │
                                                            └──────────────┘
```

**Steps:**
1. Read timestamps from stdin or file (streaming, line by line)
2. Parse each timestamp according to input format (epoch_ms, epoch_s, rfc3339)
3. Convert UTC instant to local datetime in specified timezone
4. Compute bucket boundaries:
   - Day: local 00:00:00 to next day 00:00:00
   - Week: week-start local 00:00:00 to next week-start 00:00:00
   - Month: first day of month 00:00:00 to first day of next month 00:00:00
5. Convert bucket boundaries back to UTC
6. Output result in specified format

### range Subcommand

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│   Start/End  │────▶│   Parse      │────▶│   Generate   │────▶│   Sort &     │
│   Timestamps │     │   Range      │     │   Buckets    │     │   Output     │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘
```

**Steps:**
1. Parse start and end timestamps (UTC instants)
2. Convert to local time in specified timezone
3. Generate all buckets between start and end:
   - Find first bucket boundary on or after start
   - Iterate bucket boundaries until past end
4. Sort buckets by `start_utc` (deterministic output)
5. Output as JSON array

### explain Subcommand

```
┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│   Local      │────▶│   Analyze    │────▶│   Apply      │────▶│   Output     │
│   Time + TZ  │     │   DST Status │     │   Policy     │     │   Result     │
└──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘     └──────────────┘
```

**Steps:**
1. Parse local time string (no offset) and timezone
2. Analyze DST status:
   - Normal: unique mapping to UTC
   - Nonexistent: time skipped during DST spring forward
   - Ambiguous: time occurs twice during DST fall back
3. Apply policy to resolve:
   - Error policies: return error with explanation
   - Resolution policies: compute the resolved UTC instant
4. Output explanation with DST details

---

## DST Handling Strategy

### Problem Statement

Daylight Saving Time creates two categories of problematic local times:

1. **Nonexistent Times**: During spring forward, a range of local times is skipped
   - Example: In Europe/Berlin on 2026-03-29, 02:00 jumps to 03:00
   - Local times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 do not exist

2. **Ambiguous Times**: During fall back, a range of local times occurs twice
   - Example: In Europe/Berlin on 2026-10-25, 02:00 occurs twice
   - Local times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 are ambiguous

### Strategy for bucket Subcommand

The `bucket` command only accepts **Instants** (UTC timestamps with offset), so:
- No ambiguous/nonexistent times can be input
- DST is handled during bucket boundary computation
- Bucket boundaries are computed in local time, then converted to UTC

**Example: DST Start Day Bucket**

```
Input: 2026-03-29T00:15:00Z (UTC)
TZ: Europe/Berlin

1. Convert to local: 2026-03-29T01:15:00+01:00 (before DST switch)
2. Find day bucket start: 2026-03-29T00:00:00 local
3. Find day bucket end: 2026-03-30T00:00:00 local
4. Convert boundaries to UTC:
   - start_local 2026-03-29T00:00:00+01:00 → 2026-03-28T23:00:00Z
   - end_local 2026-03-30T00:00:00+02:00 → 2026-03-29T22:00:00Z
5. Result: 23-hour bucket (DST spring forward)
```

### Strategy for explain Subcommand

The `explain` command accepts local times without offset, requiring explicit policy:

```
Nonexistent Time Resolution:
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Input: 2026-03-29T02:30:00 in Europe/Berlin                 │
│ Status: Nonexistent (skipped during DST spring forward)     │
│                                                             │
│ Policy: Error → Return error with explanation               │
│ Policy: ShiftForward → Resolve to 2026-03-29T03:00:00+02:00 │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

Ambiguous Time Resolution:
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Input: 2026-10-25T02:30:00 in Europe/Berlin                 │
│ Status: Ambiguous (occurs twice during DST fall back)       │
│                                                             │
│ Policy: Error → Return error with explanation               │
│ Policy: First → Resolve to 2026-10-25T02:30:00+02:00 (DST)  │
│ Policy: Second → Resolve to 2026-10-25T02:30:00+01:00 (STD) │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Bucket Boundary Computation Across DST

When computing bucket boundaries that span DST transitions:

1. **Compute in local time first**: Find the local calendar boundary
2. **Convert each boundary independently**: Each conversion handles its own DST context
3. **Result may have non-24-hour buckets**: This is correct and expected

```
DST Spring Forward (23-hour day):
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Local: 2026-03-29 00:00 → 2026-03-30 00:00                   │
│ UTC:   2026-03-28 23:00Z → 2026-03-29 22:00Z (23 hours)      │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

DST Fall Back (25-hour day):
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Local: 2026-10-25 00:00 → 2026-10-26 00:00                   │
│ UTC:   2026-10-24 22:00Z → 2026-10-25 23:00Z (25 hours)      │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## JSON Output Contract

All output uses structs with serde serialization for deterministic field ordering:

### bucket Output

```json
{
  "input": {
    "ts": "2026-03-29T00:15:00Z",
    "epoch_ms": 1793362500000
  },
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "interval": "day",
  "bucket": {
    "key": "2026-03-29",
    "start_local": "2026-03-29T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-30T00:00:00+02:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-28T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-29T22:00:00Z"
  }
}
```

### range Output

```json
[
  {
    "key": "2026-03-27",
    "start_local": "2026-03-27T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-28T00:00:00+01:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-26T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-27T23:00:00Z"
  },
  {
    "key": "2026-03-28",
    "start_local": "2026-03-28T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-29T00:00:00+02:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-27T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-28T22:00:00Z"
  }
]
```

### explain Output

```json
{
  "input_local": "2026-03-29T02:30:00",
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "status": "nonexistent",
  "resolution": {
    "policy": "shift_forward",
    "resolved_utc": "2026-03-29T01:00:00Z",
    "resolved_local": "2026-03-29T03:00:00+02:00"
  }
}
```

---

## Dependencies

### tzbucket-core

| Crate | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `chrono` | Date/time primitives |
| `chrono-tz` | IANA timezone database (compile-time) |
| `serde` | Serialization for JSON output |
| `thiserror` | Error type definitions |

### tzbucket-cli

| Crate | Purpose |
|-------|---------|
| `tzbucket-core` | Core library |
| `clap` | CLI argument parsing |
| `serde_json` | JSON output |
| `tracing` | Logging/debugging |
| `tracing-subscriber` | Log output configuration |
| `anyhow` | Error handling in main |

---

## Testing Strategy

### Unit Tests (tzbucket-core)

- Interval/WeekStart/Policy model tests
- Timestamp parsing tests
- Bucket computation tests with known DST boundaries
- Timezone conversion tests

### Integration Tests (tzbucket-cli)

- Golden tests using fixtures and expected JSON output
- Exit code verification
- Streaming input tests

### Required Fixtures

1. `berlin_dst_start_2026.txt` - Timestamps around 2026-03-29 DST spring forward
2. `berlin_dst_end_2026.txt` - Timestamps around 2026-10-25 DST fall back
3. `ny_dst_2026.txt` - Smoke test for America/New_York timezone
4. `explain_nonexistent.txt` - Local time that does not exist
5. `explain_ambiguous.txt` - Local time that is ambiguous

---

## Implementation Order

1. **Core models**: `Interval`, `WeekStart`, `Policy`, `Bucket` structs
2. **Timestamp parsing**: epoch_ms, epoch_s, rfc3339 formats
3. **Bucket computation**: Day bucket first, then Week, then Month
4. **CLI bucket subcommand**: Basic functionality
5. **DST tests**: Berlin fixtures and golden files
6. **range subcommand**: Bucket list generation
7. **explain subcommand**: DST analysis and policy resolution
8. **Error handling**: Proper exit codes and messages
