docs/dst_notes.md, before:

# DST (Daylight Saving Time) Notes

This document provides detailed information about Daylight Saving Time (DST) and how it affects time bucketing operations.

## What is DST?

Daylight Saving Time is the practice of advancing clocks during warmer months to extend evening daylight. Clocks are typically:

- **Sprung forward** in spring (lose 1 hour)
- **Fallen back** in autumn/fall (gain 1 hour)

Not all regions observe DST, and the dates vary by location. This creates complexity for time-based data processing.

## DST Transitions in 2026

### Europe/Berlin

| Event | Date | Transition | Local Time Change |
|-------|------|------------|-------------------|
| Spring Forward | March 29, 2026 | 02:00 → 03:00 | 23-hour day |
| Fall Back | October 25, 2026 | 03:00 → 02:00 | 25-hour day |

**Spring Forward Details:**

At 02:00 CET (Central European Time), clocks jump to 03:00 CEST (Central European Summer Time):
- Times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 do not exist
- The hour after 01:59:59 is 03:00:00
- The day has only 23 hours

**Fall Back Details:**

At 03:00 CEST, clocks fall back to 02:00 CET:
- Times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 occur twice
- The hour after 01:59:59 CEST is 02:00:00 CET
- The day has 25 hours

### America/New_York

| Event | Date | Transition | Local Time Change |
|-------|------|------------|-------------------|
| Spring Forward | March 8, 2026 | 02:00 → 03:00 | 23-hour day |
| Fall Back | November 1, 2026 | 02:00 → 01:00 | 25-hour day |

**Spring Forward Details:**

At 02:00 EST (Eastern Standard Time), clocks jump to 03:00 EDT (Eastern Daylight Time):
- Times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 do not exist
- The hour after 01:59:59 is 03:00:00
- The day has only 23 hours

**Fall Back Details:**

At 02:00 EDT, clocks fall back to 01:00 EST:
- Times 01:00:00 through 01:59:59 occur twice
- The hour after 01:59:59 EDT is 01:00:00 EST
- The day has 25 hours

### Other Timezones

DST rules vary by region:

| Timezone | Spring Forward | Fall Back |
|----------|---------------|-----------|
| Europe/London | March 29, 2026 | October 25, 2026 |
| Europe/Paris | March 29, 2026 | October 25, 2026 |
| America/Los_Angeles | March 8, 2026 | November 1, 2026 |
| America/Chicago | March 8, 2026 | November 1, 2026 |
| Australia/Sydney | April 5, 2026 | October 4, 2026 (opposite seasons) |
| Asia/Tokyo | No DST | No DST |

## Nonexistent Times

During spring forward, certain local times don't exist because the clock jumps forward.

### Example: Berlin, March 29, 2026

```
01:59:59 CET  →  02:00:00 CEST (skipped)
                 03:00:00 CEST
```

The local time `2026-03-29T02:30:00` does not exist in Berlin.

### Handling Nonexistent Times

When you use `tzbucket explain` with a nonexistent time:

```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-03-29T02:30:00
```

Output:
```json
{
  "error": "Nonexistent time '2026-03-29T02:30:00' in timezone 'Europe/Berlin'. Skipped due to DST spring forward. Use --policy-nonexistent=shift_forward to resolve.",
  "status": "nonexistent",
  "exit_code": 2
}
```

### Resolution Policies

Use `--policy-nonexistent` to resolve:

| Policy | Behavior | Example Result |
|--------|----------|----------------|
| `error` | Return error (default) | Exit code 2 |
| `shift_forward` | Move to later time | 02:30 → 03:30 CEST |
| `shift_backward` | Move to earlier time | 02:30 → 01:30 CET |

Example with policy:
```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-03-29T02:30:00 --policy-nonexistent shift_forward
```

Output:
```json
{
  "local_time": "2026-03-29T02:30:00",
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "status": "nonexistent",
  "resolution": {
    "policy": "shift_forward",
    "result": "2026-03-29T03:30:00+02:00"
  }
}
```

## Ambiguous Times

During fall back, certain local times occur twice because the clock moves backward.

### Example: Berlin, October 25, 2026

```
01:59:59 CEST  →  02:00:00 CEST (first occurrence)
02:59:59 CEST  →  02:00:00 CET (clock falls back)
                  02:00:00 CET (second occurrence)
```

The local time `2026-10-25T02:30:00` occurs twice in Berlin:
1. 02:30 CEST (UTC+02:00) - summer time
2. 02:30 CET (UTC+01:00) - winter time

### Handling Ambiguous Times

When you use `tzbucket explain` with an ambiguous time:

```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-10-25T02:30:00
```

Output:
```json
{
  "error": "Ambiguous time '2026-10-25T02:30:00' in timezone 'Europe/Berlin'. Occurs twice due to DST fall back. Use --policy-ambiguous=first or --policy-ambiguous=second to resolve.",
  "status": "ambiguous",
  "exit_code": 2
}
```

### Resolution Policies

Use `--policy-ambiguous` to resolve:

| Policy | Behavior | Example Result |
|--------|----------|----------------|
| `error` | Return error (default) | Exit code 2 |
| `first` | Use first occurrence (summer time) | 02:30 CEST (+02:00) |
| `second` | Use second occurrence (winter time) | 02:30 CET (+01:00) |

Example with policy:
```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-10-25T02:30:00 --policy-ambiguous first
```

Output:
```json
{
  "local_time": "2026-10-25T02:30:00",
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "status": "ambiguous",
  "resolution": {
    "policy": "first",
    "result": "2026-10-25T02:30:00+02:00"
  }
}
```

## How tzbucket Handles DST

### bucket command

The `bucket` command only accepts UTC timestamps, so there's no ambiguity:

- Each UTC instant maps to exactly one bucket
- Bucket boundaries are computed correctly for DST transitions
- 23-hour and 25-hour days are handled automatically

Example showing a 23-hour day bucket:

```json
{
  "bucket": {
    "key": "2026-03-29",
    "start_local": "2026-03-29T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-30T00:00:00+02:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-28T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-29T22:00:00Z"
  }
}
```

Note: `end_utc` - `start_utc` = 23 hours (2026-03-29T22:00:00Z - 2026-03-28T23:00:00Z = 23 hours).

Example showing a 25-hour day bucket:

```json
{
  "bucket": {
    "key": "2026-10-25",
    "start_local": "2026-10-25T00:00:00+02:00",
    "end_local": "2026-10-26T00:00:00+01:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-10-24T22:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-10-25T23:00:00Z"
  }
}
```

Note: `end_utc` - `start_utc` = 25 hours (2026-10-25T23:00:00Z - 2026-10-24T22:00:00Z = 25 hours).

### range command

The `range` command generates bucket sequences with correct UTC boundaries:

```bash
tzbucket range --tz Europe/Berlin --interval day --start 2026-03-27T00:00:00Z --end 2026-03-31T00:00:00Z
```

This produces buckets including the DST transition day with correct 23-hour duration.

### explain command

The `explain` command handles local times with explicit policies:

- Detects nonexistent times (spring forward)
- Detects ambiguous times (fall back)
- Provides clear error messages with resolution suggestions
- Applies policies when specified

## Best Practices

### For Data Pipelines

1. **Store timestamps in UTC**: Always store and process timestamps in UTC to avoid ambiguity.

2. **Use bucket for grouping**: The `bucket` command handles DST correctly because it works with UTC instants.

3. **Be careful with local times**: When accepting local time input, always handle nonexistent and ambiguous cases explicitly.

### For User Interfaces

1. **Display in local time**: Convert UTC to local time for display, but keep the original UTC.

2. **Warn about DST issues**: When users input local times near DST transitions, warn them about potential issues.

3. **Use explain for debugging**: The `explain` command is useful for understanding why a particular local time behaves unexpectedly.

## Further Reading

- [IANA Time Zone Database](https://www.iana.org/time-zones) - The source of timezone data
- [Wikipedia: Daylight saving time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daylight_saving_time) - General information
- [RFC 5545: DATE-TIME](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5545#section-3.3.5) - Handling time in calendaring

Commit message:

refactor(core): change week bucket key to use starting date
Replace ISO week number format (YYYY-Wnn) with week starting date
(YYYY-MM-DD) for week bucket keys. This simplifies the implementation
by removing complex week number calculation logic and provides a more
intuitive key format that works consistently for both Monday and Sunday
week starts.

The new format makes sorting straightforward (lexicographic order equals
chronological order) and allows easy determination of the exact date
range from the key.

Also includes documentation updates for bucket key formats, range
semantics, and DST handling behavior.

BREAKING CHANGE: Week bucket keys now use YYYY-MM-DD format instead of
YYYY-Wnn format. Any code parsing or filtering by week bucket keys will
need to be updated.

docs/dst_notes.md, after:

# DST (Daylight Saving Time) Notes

This document provides detailed information about Daylight Saving Time (DST) and how it affects time bucketing operations.

## What is DST?

Daylight Saving Time is the practice of advancing clocks during warmer months to extend evening daylight. Clocks are typically:

- **Sprung forward** in spring (lose 1 hour)
- **Fallen back** in autumn/fall (gain 1 hour)

Not all regions observe DST, and the dates vary by location. This creates complexity for time-based data processing.

## DST Transitions in 2026

### Europe/Berlin

| Event | Date | Transition | Local Time Change |
|-------|------|------------|-------------------|
| Spring Forward | March 29, 2026 | 02:00 → 03:00 | 23-hour day |
| Fall Back | October 25, 2026 | 03:00 → 02:00 | 25-hour day |

**Spring Forward Details:**

At 02:00 CET (Central European Time), clocks jump to 03:00 CEST (Central European Summer Time):
- Times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 do not exist
- The hour after 01:59:59 is 03:00:00
- The day has only 23 hours

**Fall Back Details:**

At 03:00 CEST, clocks fall back to 02:00 CET:
- Times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 occur twice
- The hour after 01:59:59 CEST is 02:00:00 CET
- The day has 25 hours

### America/New_York

| Event | Date | Transition | Local Time Change |
|-------|------|------------|-------------------|
| Spring Forward | March 8, 2026 | 02:00 → 03:00 | 23-hour day |
| Fall Back | November 1, 2026 | 02:00 → 01:00 | 25-hour day |

**Spring Forward Details:**

At 02:00 EST (Eastern Standard Time), clocks jump to 03:00 EDT (Eastern Daylight Time):
- Times 02:00:00 through 02:59:59 do not exist
- The hour after 01:59:59 is 03:00:00
- The day has only 23 hours

**Fall Back Details:**

At 02:00 EDT, clocks fall back to 01:00 EST:
- Times 01:00:00 through 01:59:59 occur twice
- The hour after 01:59:59 EDT is 01:00:00 EST
- The day has 25 hours

### Other Timezones

DST rules vary by region:

| Timezone | Spring Forward | Fall Back |
|----------|---------------|-----------|
| Europe/London | March 29, 2026 | October 25, 2026 |
| Europe/Paris | March 29, 2026 | October 25, 2026 |
| America/Los_Angeles | March 8, 2026 | November 1, 2026 |
| America/Chicago | March 8, 2026 | November 1, 2026 |
| Australia/Sydney | April 5, 2026 | October 4, 2026 (opposite seasons) |
| Asia/Tokyo | No DST | No DST |

## Nonexistent Times

During spring forward, certain local times don't exist because the clock jumps forward.

### Example: Berlin, March 29, 2026

```
01:59:59 CET  →  02:00:00 CEST (skipped)
                 03:00:00 CEST
```

The local time `2026-03-29T02:30:00` does not exist in Berlin.

### Handling Nonexistent Times

When you use `tzbucket explain` with a nonexistent time:

```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-03-29T02:30:00
```

Output:
```json
{
  "error": "Nonexistent time '2026-03-29T02:30:00' in timezone 'Europe/Berlin'. Skipped due to DST spring forward. Use --policy-nonexistent=shift_forward to resolve.",
  "status": "nonexistent",
  "exit_code": 2
}
```

### Resolution Policies

Use `--policy-nonexistent` to resolve:

| Policy | Behavior | Example Result |
|--------|----------|----------------|
| `error` | Return error (default) | Exit code 2 |
| `shift_forward` | Move to later time | 02:30 → 03:30 CEST |
| `shift_backward` | Move to earlier time | 02:30 → 01:30 CET |

Example with policy:
```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-03-29T02:30:00 --policy-nonexistent shift_forward
```

Output:
```json
{
  "local_time": "2026-03-29T02:30:00",
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "status": "nonexistent",
  "resolution": {
    "policy": "shift_forward",
    "result": "2026-03-29T03:30:00+02:00"
  }
}
```

## Ambiguous Times

During fall back, certain local times occur twice because the clock moves backward.

### Example: Berlin, October 25, 2026

```
01:59:59 CEST  →  02:00:00 CEST (first occurrence)
02:59:59 CEST  →  02:00:00 CET (clock falls back)
                  02:00:00 CET (second occurrence)
```

The local time `2026-10-25T02:30:00` occurs twice in Berlin:
1. 02:30 CEST (UTC+02:00) - summer time
2. 02:30 CET (UTC+01:00) - winter time

### Handling Ambiguous Times

When you use `tzbucket explain` with an ambiguous time:

```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-10-25T02:30:00
```

Output:
```json
{
  "error": "Ambiguous time '2026-10-25T02:30:00' in timezone 'Europe/Berlin'. Occurs twice due to DST fall back. Use --policy-ambiguous=first or --policy-ambiguous=second to resolve.",
  "status": "ambiguous",
  "exit_code": 2
}
```

### Resolution Policies

Use `--policy-ambiguous` to resolve:

| Policy | Behavior | Example Result |
|--------|----------|----------------|
| `error` | Return error (default) | Exit code 2 |
| `first` | Use first occurrence (summer time) | 02:30 CEST (+02:00) |
| `second` | Use second occurrence (winter time) | 02:30 CET (+01:00) |

Example with policy:
```bash
tzbucket explain --tz Europe/Berlin --local 2026-10-25T02:30:00 --policy-ambiguous first
```

Output:
```json
{
  "local_time": "2026-10-25T02:30:00",
  "tz": "Europe/Berlin",
  "status": "ambiguous",
  "resolution": {
    "policy": "first",
    "result": "2026-10-25T02:30:00+02:00"
  }
}
```

## How tzbucket Handles DST

tzbucket handles DST transitions naturally through proper timezone conversion. The key insight is that bucket boundaries are computed in local time first, then converted to UTC independently.

### Natural DST Handling

When computing a day bucket:

1. **Find local midnight**: Start with 00:00:00 in the local timezone
2. **Convert to UTC**: Each midnight boundary is converted independently to UTC
3. **DST emerges naturally**: The UTC offset difference creates 23-hour or 25-hour days

This approach means DST is handled correctly without special-case logic. The timezone database (via chrono-tz) provides the correct offset for each local timestamp.

**Example: Berlin Spring Forward (March 29, 2026)**

| Step | Local Time | UTC Time | Notes |
|------|------------|----------|-------|
| Day start | 2026-03-29T00:00:00+01:00 | 2026-03-28T23:00:00Z | Before DST switch |
| Day end | 2026-03-30T00:00:00+02:00 | 2026-03-29T22:00:00Z | After DST switch |
| **Duration** | - | **23 hours** | DST spring forward |

The 23-hour duration emerges naturally from the offset change (+01:00 → +02:00).

### bucket command

The `bucket` command only accepts UTC timestamps, so there's no ambiguity:

- Each UTC instant maps to exactly one bucket
- Bucket boundaries are computed correctly for DST transitions
- 23-hour and 25-hour days are handled automatically

Example showing a 23-hour day bucket:

```json
{
  "bucket": {
    "key": "2026-03-29",
    "start_local": "2026-03-29T00:00:00+01:00",
    "end_local": "2026-03-30T00:00:00+02:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-03-28T23:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-03-29T22:00:00Z"
  }
}
```

Note: `end_utc` - `start_utc` = 23 hours (2026-03-29T22:00:00Z - 2026-03-28T23:00:00Z = 23 hours).

Example showing a 25-hour day bucket:

```json
{
  "bucket": {
    "key": "2026-10-25",
    "start_local": "2026-10-25T00:00:00+02:00",
    "end_local": "2026-10-26T00:00:00+01:00",
    "start_utc": "2026-10-24T22:00:00Z",
    "end_utc": "2026-10-25T23:00:00Z"
  }
}
```

Note: `end_utc` - `start_utc` = 25 hours (2026-10-25T23:00:00Z - 2026-10-24T22:00:00Z = 25 hours).

### range command

The `range` command generates bucket sequences with correct UTC boundaries:

```bash
tzbucket range --tz Europe/Berlin --interval day --start 2026-03-27T00:00:00Z --end 2026-03-31T00:00:00Z
```

This produces buckets including the DST transition day with correct 23-hour duration.

### explain command

The `explain` command handles local times with explicit policies:

- Detects nonexistent times (spring forward)
- Detects ambiguous times (fall back)
- Provides clear error messages with resolution suggestions
- Applies policies when specified

## Best Practices

### For Data Pipelines

1. **Store timestamps in UTC**: Always store and process timestamps in UTC to avoid ambiguity.

2. **Use bucket for grouping**: The `bucket` command handles DST correctly because it works with UTC instants.

3. **Be careful with local times**: When accepting local time input, always handle nonexistent and ambiguous cases explicitly.

### For User Interfaces

1. **Display in local time**: Convert UTC to local time for display, but keep the original UTC.

2. **Warn about DST issues**: When users input local times near DST transitions, warn them about potential issues.

3. **Use explain for debugging**: The `explain` command is useful for understanding why a particular local time behaves unexpectedly.

## Further Reading

- [IANA Time Zone Database](https://www.iana.org/time-zones) - The source of timezone data
- [Wikipedia: Daylight saving time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daylight_saving_time) - General information
- [RFC 5545: DATE-TIME](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5545#section-3.3.5) - Handling time in calendaring
